At first sight it’s pretty clear and obvious, Bitcoin used and uses standard technologies which are available for over 20 years. But every time you think, you totally got it you realize that there are so many more implications, uses cases, potential problem solutions where Blockchain would or could make sense. Then you realize you don’t know very much about Blockchain and there so many dimensions you didn’t think off in the first place – until you are completly convinced to truely understand the matter. But that point is probably just the start of a new cycle of not knowing, exploring and realizing.

In this section we want to provide you with some information for beginners, content which didn’t fit somewhere else and would like to share our insights of the way down the rabbit hole.

BLOCKCHAIN PRIMER
Blockchain is a term that first emerged in the context of Bitcoin. Bitcoin is a digital currency technology that was invented and first published on the internet in 2009 by an anonymous person or group known as Satoshi Nakamoto. Today there is much talk about its so called underlying core technologies commonly referred to as blockchains or distributed ledgers. In spite of being eight years old, the general knowledge and broader understanding of the subject is still evolving. We are convinced that it has the potential to lead to fundamental changes in our existing economic, legal, and political systems. Read on …

DIGITAL CURRENCIES
When we think about money we usually see piles of coins or banknotes in front of our inner eyes. In reality most of our money has become virtual quite some time ago. When we use our credit cards, make wire transfers or pay via paypal, we are using corporate digital payment systems to transact money. Behind the scenes this money is nothing but records of ownership in databases that are controlled by our banks. The base supply of this money is issued by central banks, which are generally independent of the government executive. The vast majority of our money is created by banks themselves through fractional reserve banking. Read on …

CONTENT "ON" A BLOCKCHAIN
It is important to realize that the fundamental architecture of open and immutable blockchains is not designed as storage for media content. The public blockchain technology and its security model require all participants to communicate and replicate all data to all participants, which quite rapidly becomes infeasible as the network grows. Competition for storage space on a globally replicated, highly secure and immutable blockchain will create market conditions in which transaction costs become prohibitive for most of the participants. We currently can see this happening in Bitcoin network. Read on …

EXISTING STANDARD IDENTIFIERS
With a growing amount of content online, there is an increasing need for a universal identifier. A content identifier is a key factor to generate value from content. A universal and auto-generated identifier will simplify management, distribution, tracking and licensing of content. A free and open source solution to create, manage, and integrate such an identifier will also support collaboration and make content interoperable between different parties. This will hugely increase the speed of many processes throughout the content industry. Read on …